WD1200 - Advanced Web Development
0x08 - What happens when you type holbertonschool.com in your browser and press Enter
By: Zach Wilsterman


Introduction
It may seem like a simple matter to open a web page in your browser, but the truth is that in the background there are many different processes that occur in order to deliver you the information that you request.
First, the browser must make a DNS (Domain Name System) request in order to translate the human-readable URL (Uniform Resource Locator) into an IP (Internet Protocol) address, which tells the browser where to send its request. From there, the browser will create a TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) connection between your computer and the server. Both your computer and the server may contain firewalls, programs which filter incoming and outgoing traffic to ensure that only desired connections can be made. The browser’s request may be blocked if it does not come from a path approved by the firewall. If the web server uses HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure) an SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) is created to encrypt the transmitted data. For high traffic websites, a load balancer may be used to split traffic between multiple web servers so that the browser’s request can be served in a timely manner. Now that the browser’s request has finally reached the appropriate web server, the web server will send its own requests to any application servers that it may use to provide dynamic content. Once the web server has retrieved the information it requested, it sends everything back to your browser, which translates the information into a web page.

Domain Name System
The Domain Name System, or DNS as it is commonly known, is a database in which registered domain names are stored along with their associated IP addresses. In addition to IP addresses the DNS also stores records such as mail servers, names servers, domain name aliases, and more, but these are outside the scope of this paper, so we are only concerned with IP address records. The first thing the browser does when “https://holbertonschool.com” is entered into the search bar is send a DNS request to retrieve the associated IP address. Once the DNS receives the domain name from your browser, it searches its database to find matching records, and it returns the associated IP address.
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
A TCP/IP connection is how computers communicate over the internet. It is a set of rules and protocols that ensure that computers and servers can communicate effectively. It contains two layers: the TCP layer and the IP layer.
The higher layer, TCP, breaks data into packets; small bits of information that can easily be transmitted over the established connection. The lower layer, IP, ensures that the packets are sent to the correct destination. This is the IP in IP address. Once the server receives the TCP packets, it uses its own TCP layer to put the packets back together into the originally transmitted information.

Firewall
A firewall is a program or hardware device that is installed on a computer or network to filter incoming and outgoing traffic. It acts as a barrier between the network and external connections, such as the internet, and is designed to block unauthorized access and protect against cyber threats. A firewall can be configured to allow or deny traffic based on various criteria, such as the source or destination of the traffic, the type of traffic, or the port number. For example, a firewall installed on a public server might only allow traffic from pre-approved sources and through pre-approved ports. This ensures that only legitimate requests are answered and that malicious or unauthorized requests are blocked. In this way, firewalls help to protect against cyber attacks and other security threats, and can play a critical role in securing sensitive information and systems.

Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure/Secure Sockets Layer
HTTPS is a secure protocol that ensures data being sent over the internet is encrypted. SSL is the layer that actually provides the encryption. It does this using a complex system of keys and certificates. Once the data is encrypted, it becomes unreadable to anyone who may intercept the data as it transmits between your computer and the server. Once the server receives the encrypted data, it has its own SSL layer which decrypts the data into something readable.

Load Balancers
A load balancer is a special server used to direct web traffic by splitting it among multiple other web servers. A server is only able to handle one request at a time, and even though it is able handle each request very quickly, it still must form a queue of requests if it receives too many in a short period of time. For example, a popular web page may receive many thousands of requests per second, which would lead to each request being queued and handled in the order that they are received. This may lead to very long wait times if the queue backs up too much.
This problem can be solved with a load balancer, which redirects requests between servers each containing their own copy of the website. By doing this, the load balancer can quickly direct a request to a server that has the smallest wait time for its queue, and return information to your computer as quickly as possible.

Web Servers
At this point, your browser has requested a DNS lookup of holbertonschool.com’s IP address, established a TCP/IP connection at that address and broken its request into tiny packets, ensured that the firewall would allow the packets to pass, used SSL to encrypt the packets, and sent them to the load balancing server, where they have been redirected to an available web server. Now that the web server has received the packets, it decrypts them in the SSL layer and puts together the request with the TCP layer. Now it is time for it to serve the request. It begins by gathering all parts of the requested web page that it has stored locally, such as the pages HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. It’s not finished though; many web pages have dynamic elements which are not stored locally, for these, the web server must send requests to:

Application Servers
Application servers are specialized servers containing dynamic information that the web server needs in order to build a dynamic web page. They are often accessed using what is called an API, or Application Programming Interface. This is a special, dynamic, URL containing the information request. The web server connects to the application server in the same way that your browser connects to the web server.

Conclusion
Finally, the web server has everything that it needs. It has received the request from your computer, gathered local files, requested information from its application servers, and has its reply ready to send. It breaks its reply into packets with TCP, encrypts it with SSL, and sends the packets to the requesting IP address: your computer. Finally, your browser receives the packets, decrypts them in the SSL layers, reassembles them with TCP layer, and renders the information into the Holberton School homepage to display in your browser window.
